What would you do if you were tempted or pressured to commit some sort of wrongdoing?
There are many people in the world who would give in to the temptation or the pressure,
especially if they felt that they could benefit in some way, and they thought no one would find out about it.
But would doing that really contribute to a person's joy?
In the previous talk, we saw a dramatization of a brother named Ben.
At first, he chose to accept a promotion at work that put him under great stress.
Let's take another look at him in that position and see how he handles things when his boss
pressures him to be dishonest.
Hey Ben, looks like you forgot to sign off from the job water.
Actually, these failed that quality inspection, remember?
Yeah, but I like two tenths of a point.
Yeah, I already talked Steve about replacing the components.
And we're going to get that order adjusted and I'll have a new one for you on your desk tomorrow afternoon.
Ben, there's no time for that.
This is a huge account.
If you don't sign off on this, you'd be hurting the whole company.
What?
Victor, I'm...
I'm not sure that I'm really comfortable
bypassing the inspection when...
Ben, I'm not asking you to tell some big lie.
Okay, this is a technicality.
Remember, a good quarter means good bonuses for everyone, including you.
I didn't want to do it.
But the last thing that Lisa and I needed was for me to lose my job.
I really didn't have a choice.
They can't believe you.
And they might not...
I kept telling myself that it was no big deal.
All lies are bad, even new ones.
One lie leads to another and they cause much harm.
It's simple, right?
Jehovah's people always tell the truth.
Did you hear what Ben said?
I kept telling myself that it was no big deal.
But if that were really true, then why was he so uncomfortable about what he had done?
It is because wrongdoing does not lead to true joy.
Ben's conscience was not clean.
It was telling him Jehovah's people always tell the truth.
And what is the conscience?
A young boy was asked that question and he said,
when you're good, you don't even know you have it.
But when you're bad, it hurts.
Another child said that in her head there was a green light and a red light.
And that when she was told to do something that she knew was wrong,
the red light would flash.
Well, they both had the right idea.
Our conscience is our inner sense of right and wrong that Jehovah instilled in us.
And the Bible says it is like a law written in the human heart.
Speaking of people in general, look at what Romans 2.15 says as it explains the function of the
conscience. That's Romans 2.15.
They are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts,
while their conscience is bearing witness with them.
And by their own thoughts, they are being accused or even excused.
Jehovah gave us a conscience so that we can evaluate any situation that arises in life,
make a right choice and then judge ourselves afterward on the choice we made.
If we allow ourselves to do what we know is wrong, our conscience will surely strike us.
Then if we repeatedly ignore our conscience, it will malfunction and become insensitive.
And it will not recognize dangers that could damage our relationship with Jehovah.
The first time a person does something he knows he should not do, his conscience may prick him
and he may feel guilty. But if he does it again and again, his conscience will gradually fail
to respond and he may get involved in even more serious wrongdoing, seemingly small compromises
often lead to larger ones and larger compromises further distance people from the happy God.
And that leads to feelings of worthlessness and heartache, whereas a clean conscience
that results from obeying Jehovah brings us self-respect, personal dignity, and real joy.
Now, how can we safeguard our conscience so that it is always clean?
By studying Bible principles and meditating on how to apply them,
so that when we are faced with important decisions, we will know how to respond in a way
that will contribute to our joy. We have to sensitize our conscience by learning and loving
Jehovah's view of what is right and what is wrong. And being convinced that living in harmony with
his standards is the best way of life. And that is how the Psalmist David felt. If you'd like to
turn to Psalm 19 verse 8, Psalm 19 8, he wrote,
The orders from Jehovah are righteous, causing the heart to rejoice. The commandment of Jehovah is clean,
making the eyes shine. So maintaining a clean conscience in all areas of our daily life
will bring us joy in our use of alcohol, in business dealings, within our chainment choices,
and in our dealings with the opposite sex. And when we have a clean conscience as Jehovah's people,
we are not ashamed to give a witness to others. As the Apostle Paul wrote at 2 Corinthians 1-12,
we can boast that our conscience bears witness that we have conducted ourselves in the world
with holiness and godly sincerity. It times it takes real courage to be honest,
and to face whatever consequences may come our way. As you watch the following dramatization,
see how Ben benefits from being honest.
Do you have to take a quick look? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You need a hand? No, I'm good. What happened, guys? We got to do something up.
Did... I'm pretty sure that I would just say it stopped working.
Whatever you do, don't tell Victor what happened. We just got this set up last month.
Why would it just stop working? It could happen.
You can actually smell the coffee. I'll talk to Victor. Don't throw yourself under the bus, man.
We'll help you get this cleaned up. No one will have to know.
This is one of the most expensive units in the shop. You take the blame?
And you just make yourself look bad. No, it's okay. It was a mistake. I'll explain it.
We need to get this back online. In the end, I think Victor actually appreciated my honesty,
and he wasn't the only one. Mark had some questions, and we had a great discussion.
This time, instead of his conscience troubling him, Ben had a real peace of mind.
He also gained the trust and respect of others. How can you have a clean conscience?
By being determined, as Hebrews 13-18 says, to conduct yourselves honestly in all things,
whether other humans are aware of your good conduct or not.
Then, you can sleep each night with the satisfaction of knowing Jehovah is pleased with you.
As they say, there is no pillow so soft as a clean conscience. It rewards us with peace of mind and joy.
Besides a clean conscience, what else brings true joy?
Listen, as Brother William Mallenfant, the helper to the teaching committee considers the next talk of the symposium.
What contributes to joy? Meaningful work.